# Who are you and what do you do in the School?

I’m Jeff Paril, a research associate in weed genomics in the Adaptative Evolution Lab working with Alex Fournier-Level. Also, I've recently concluded a Post-doc research position in the Spatial Ecology and Evolution Lab with Ben Phillips were we chased suppression gene drives in space using stochastic simulations.

I try to dabble in the basic question in genetics, which is how do we predict the phenotype, i.e. the physical, morphological, biochemical or any observable chracteristic of an individual - be that an animal, plant or any living thing, using its genotype, i.e. the sequence of bases A, T, C, and G in its DNA. I use statistical techniques to predict the levels of herbicide resistance of ryegrass. A major agricultural pest in cereal farms, e.g. wheat and barley fields. Farmers hate these weeds because these can significantly reduce their crop yields and also cause hay fever. They use herbicides, specially formulated chemical concoctions to kill these weeds with nil to minimal non-target effects on the environment. However, these weeds are craftly slippery little buggers! They're evolving right in front of our eyes, by developing resistance over decades of herbicide application! And so as the saying goes, "If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles." (Sun Tzu, The Art of War). To effectively and efficiently fight the negative effects of weeds on crop yields we have to have a method of measuring the levels of herbicide resistance of weed populations in the field. This way we can help farmers and agronomists (fancy term for farm consultants) make informed decisions on the best way to control weeds which would maximise sustainable yield. For example, if we predict high resistance for an herbicide let's say the infamous glyphosate or roundup herbicide, then the farmers may opt to reduce if not totally avoid using glyphosate in favour of another herbicide the weeds have not developed resistance to yet. Alternatively, the farmer may engineer a hybrid approach like using non-chemical weed control strategies such as hot water/steam treatments.

- Segway to population control with genetic methods - suppression/eradication gene drives!

# What problem are you trying to solve with your research?

- With the gene drives project we found that the new and exciting application of CRISPR to eradicate (or control) pest and invasive populations such as the dengue- and malaria-carrying mosquitoes or cane toads need to account for the spatial disperions capabaility of these noxious species, because these suppression drives in theory can be very effective, can fail with high probability due to chasing, i.e. the drive indefinitely chase the population it's trying to eradicate because it's fast or go through it

- With the weedomics project we want to bring herbicide resistance assays for weeds into the 21st century using genomics and genomic prediction
- This has the potential to improve not only the accuracy of the assays but also the speed and throughput

- Theoretical science: mapping genotypes with phenotypes
- Applied science: population control
- The basic question of genetics: How do we predict an individual's phenotype using it's genotype?
- Ecologically and agriculturally relevant topic of population control, i.e. invasive species in ecology and pests in agriculture: How do we control if not totally eradicate these noxious populations in areas we do not want them to be in?


# What skills do you bring to bear on these problems?

- I try to balance experimental and theoretical work.
- Greenhouse experiments, field samplings, wet lab experiments, and computational/in-silico experiments work

# Do you have any outlandish stories from your time here at Unimelb?

- There were very smart mice in the old glasshouses before the rennovation.
- I hope they found a new home not in the new glasshouse complex.

# Do you have any advice for current students?

- focus on what's fun for you
- fun as in keeps you motivated

# Links:
- I sometimes write my thoughts [here](https://jeffersonfparil.github.io).
- You may also find my tools useful:
  + [violinplotter](https://github.com/jeffersonfparil/violinplotter) to plot and compare means with violin plots.
  + [simpleRplots](https://github.com/jeffersonfparil/simpleRplots) for plotting heat maps, logistic regression plots, and timeseries ribbon plots using base R.
  + [GWAlpha.jl](https://github.com/jeffersonfparil/GWAlpha.jl), a Julia package for building genomic prediction models and performing genome-wide association on quantitative traits by inferring additive allelic effects using pool sequencing data (Pool-seq; i.e. allele frequencies).
  + [mucilage_seed_areas_openCV](https://gitlab.com/jeffersonfparil/mucilage_seed_areas_opencv) for quantifying Arabidopsis seed mucilage area with OpenCV in python.
  + [kungAnikAnik](https://github.com/jeffersonfparil/kungAnikAnik), a collection of scalable vector graphics files under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License.